After Its Big Setback, New Jersey Awards 2 Offshore Wind Contracts

By Patrick McGeehan
Published Jan. 25, 2024
Updated Jan. 30, 2024

The News
New Jersey awarded two additional contracts for electricity from offshore wind farms on Wednesday, moving forward with the state’s ambitious plans to turn to the Atlantic Ocean for power after a surprising blow to them last year.

ImageA U.S. flag waves in the foreground. Four offshore wind turbines are visible in the distance, just above the horizon.
The cost of obtaining offshore wind power has risen sharply.Credit...David Goldman/Associated Press
Why It Matters
The awards, by the state’s Board of Public Utilities, came just three months after Orsted, one of the world’s biggest developers of offshore wind farms, backed out of two contracts to supply power to New Jersey.

That abrupt withdrawal was a significant setback to the state’s goal of weaning off fossil fuels over the next three decades. Gov. Philip D. Murphy, a Democrat, set a goal of getting 11,000 megawatts of power — enough to power more than 5 million homes — from offshore wind by 2040.

“This investment in clean energy is really about the future of New Jersey and our fight against climate change,” said Christine Guhl-Sadovy, a former Murphy aide whom he appointed president of the utilities board last year.

What It Will Cost
The cost of obtaining offshore wind power has risen sharply because of worldwide inflation, higher interest rates and disruptions of supply chains. Orsted and other wind farm developers have cited those factors as reasons for canceling contracts.

Under the contracts New Jersey awarded on Wednesday, the monthly bill of the typical residential customer in New Jersey would go up by almost $7, the utilities board estimated. The canceled Orsted contracts, which were awarded in 2019 and 2021, were estimated to be about half as costly to consumers.

The Details
The state chose two of the three remaining bidders in its latest solicitation for electricity from offshore wind.

One, Leading Light Wind, would be the first large-scale U.S.-led operation to build a wind farm in the ocean and deliver power from it. Leading Light is a partnership between Invenergy and energyRe, a New York-based company chaired by Jeff Blau, the chief executive of Related Companies, one of the biggest developers in New York City.

The other winning bidder, Attentive Energy Two, is a partnership between TotalEnergies, a French utility, and London-based Corio Generation.

The two projects together would be capable of producing about 3,740 megawatts of electricity.

In addition, New Jersey still has a contract with another offshore project, Atlantic Shores, for 1,510 megawatts. Combined, the three projects could produce more than one-third of the state’s 2040 target.

What The Critics Say
Elected officials who represent parts of the Jersey Shore, including Representative Jeff Van Drew, a Republican, have ardently opposed Mr. Murphy’s offshore wind plans.

On Tuesday, Mr. Van Drew wrote to the governor calling on him to “drop your unrealistic Green New Deal agenda before you cause irreversible damage to our state’s economy, thriving ocean-based industries, and delicate marine ecosystems.”

What’s Next?
Kris Ohleth, director of the Special Initiative on Offshore Wind, a supporter of the state’s plan, said that New Jersey still had work to do to get back on pace toward its offshore wind goals. “They need to make up some lost ground,” she said.

But she said that she expected the state to respond by accelerating its granting of more contracts, rather than by paring back its ambitions.

The state’s goals “are not out of reach,” Ms. Ohleth said, then added: “They are far out, so it’s kind of hard to say.”

A correction was made on Jan. 25, 2024: An earlier version of this article misstated how many megawatts of electricity two projects, Attentive Energy Two and Leading Light Wind, together, would be capable of producing. It would be about 3,740 megawatts, not 3,470.
A correction was made on Jan. 30, 2024: An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to Leading Light Wind. It would be the first large-scale U.S.-led operation to build a wind farm in the ocean and deliver power from it. It would not be the first such operation of any size to build a wind farm in the ocean. The much smaller Block Island Wind Farm, built by an American developer off the coast of Rhode Island, started production in 2016.
When we learn of a mistake, we acknowledge it with a correction. If you spot an error, please let us know at nytnews@nytimes.com.Learn more

Patrick McGeehan is a Times reporter who covers the economy of New York City and its airports and other transportation hubs. More about Patrick McGeehan

A version of this article appears in print on Jan. 26, 2024, Section A, Page 17 of the New York edition with the headline: New Jersey Approves 2 Offshore Wind Farms. 

© 2024 The New York Times Company
